Intro to Programming with Python

Programming - Programming means writing the instructions to create a software.
Software - Software is a set of instructions to the hardware.
Code - The instructions that we write to create software is called Code.
Syntax - Similar to Grammar rules in English, Hindi, each programming language has a unique set of rules. These rules are called the Syntax of a Programming Language.

Why Python? 
Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language. With Python, it is possible to create programs with minimal amount of code. Look at the code in Java and Python used for printing the message 'Hello World'

Rules in Python Syntax
Python is case-sensitive
Indentation is important
No need for {} braces
Statements end automatically in a new line

To save
extension (.py)

Key Features
Easy and Simple Syntax
Vast number of Libraries Support
Cross Platform Support
Support Multiple Paradigam (Functional and OOPS)
Carbage Collection

Disadvantage:
Slow Execution Speed:
Dynamic Typing
Everything is an Object
Garbage Collection

Applications of Python: 
Python is a versatile language which has applications in almost every field
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Machine Learning (ML)
Big Data
Smart Devices/Internet of Things (IoT)
Cyber Security
Game Development
Backend Development, etc.

Career Opportunities:
Python developers have plenty of opportunities across the world
DevOps Engineer
Software Developer
Data Analyst
Data Scientist
Machine Learning (ML) Engineer
AI Scientist, etc.


** Steps to download and install Python:

Open your web browser and go to the official Python website at https://www.python.org/downloads/.
Click on the Download Python button for the latest stable version suitable for your operating system.
Once the installer file is downloaded, open it to start the installation process.
On the first installation screen, check the box that says Add Python to PATH.
Click Install Now and wait for the installation to complete.
When the installation finishes, click Close to exit the installer.
To verify the installation, open the Command Prompt (Windows) type python --version.


** Steps to download VSCode Windows installer:

Download the Visual Studio Code [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs?dv=win] User setup for Windows.
Run the installer with administrator permissions, VSCodeUserSetup-{version}.exe.
By default, the User setup installs VS Code under C:\Users\{Username}\AppData\Local\Programs\Microsoft VS Code.

After you install VS Code, finish setup for your development workflow:
Install additional components, including Git, Node.js, TypeScript, language runtimes, and command-line tools.
Install extensions from the Visual Studio Marketplace to add themes, formatters, debuggers, and language support.
Set up GitHub Copilot to use AI features in VS Code.
Start the VS Code tutorial for a hands-on tour of the user interface and key features.


** Steps to download Jupyter Notebook:

Check if Python is Installed:  python --version
Install Pip (Python Package Manager): pip --version
To install pip: python -m ensurepip --default-pip
Installing Jupyter Notebook: pip install notebook
Verify the installation: jupyter notebook --version
After installation, launch Jupyter Notebook using: Go to the folder -> open in cmd -> jupyter notebook

Python programs can also be written in a notepad and run from the command prompt. For this, follow the steps:

Open the notepad.
Write the code in it.
Save the file with the .py extension.
Open the terminal/command prompt.
For type in the following command >> py filename.py.
The output will be displayed.